The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mewanee, by Belle Wiley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Mewanee
       The Little Indian Boy

Author: Belle Wiley

Illustrator: Charles D. Hubbard

Release Date: August 15, 2020 [EBook #62935]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEWANEE ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, Tim Lindell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)









                                MEWANEE
                         THE LITTLE INDIAN BOY


                                    BY

                               BELLE WILEY

 CRITIC AND TEACHER OF METHODS, TRAINING SCHOOL FOR TEACHERS, ROCHESTER,
                                  N. Y.

                              ILLUSTRATED BY

                            CHARLES D. HUBBARD

[Illustration]

                       SILVER, BURDETT & COMPANY

                   BOSTON      NEW YORK      CHICAGO




                            Copyright, 1912,
                      By Silver, Burdett & Company

[Illustration]




                                CONTENTS


                    Chapter                    Page
                         I. The People            5

                        II. The Home             17

                       III. The Hunt             25

                        IV. The Enemy            35

                         V. The Friendly Tribe   43

                        VI. The Council          51

                       VII. In the Forest        65

                      VIII. The Sacrifice        79

                        IX. The Fast             89

                         X. The New Home         96

[Illustration: MEWANEE]




                                   I
                               THE PEOPLE


Mewanee was a brave little Indian boy.

He lived in a forest of North America with his father and mother and his
baby brother.

There were many other Indian people who lived in the same forest, and
Mewanee’s father was chief of them all.

Mewanee was very proud to be the chief’s son, for the chief was always
the bravest of all the Indians of his tribe.

One day mother left Mewanee and baby brother in the forest at play,
while she went to work in the cornfield.

Baby brother was swinging in his cradle from the branches of the tall
cedar tree.

Mother had made this cradle from the bark of the linden tree. It was
lined with soft rushes so that baby might be quite comfortable as he lay
in it.

The little boy could not fall out of his queer cradle because he was
tied in by means of strong deer sinews.

At first baby brother seemed quite contented as the gentle wind rocked
the cradle to and fro.

He was interested in watching Mewanee as he ran about near by.

How tall and slender and straight Mewanee’s body was!

Mewanee had only a small piece of deer skin thrown about his
copper-colored body.

The wind tossed his coarse black hair about his face and shoulders as he
played.

Suddenly Mewanee stopped running and stood very still.

He looked intently at a little hare as it scampered about the trees.

Now the hare saw Mewanee. Playfully it approached him, then slyly turned
around and ran away as fast as its little legs could carry it.

Mewanee dashed after it, forgetting all about baby brother, who was
swinging in his linden cradle.

How lightly he ran and how swiftly!

His legs went as fast as the wind.

On and on scampered the hare, in and out among the trees, seeming to
enjoy the race.

Now it stopped, and Mewanee almost caught up to it.

Away it ran again, faster and faster.

Mewanee called to it by making sounds that hares understand, but the
little hare did not stop.

[Illustration: MEWANEE DASHED AFTER IT]

Again and again he called, but the hare ran on and on.

Mewanee sat down on the ground for a moment to rest.

The little hare ran deep into the forest and was soon lost from sight.

Suddenly Mewanee put his ear to the ground and listened.

Then he jumped up and ran toward his little brother.

Baby brother was crying because he had been left alone. He wished
Mewanee to play with him.

Mewanee shouted to his brother as he ran along.

He shouted again and again, for he wished baby brother to know that he
was coming.

Baby brother heard Mewanee’s call and stopped crying. He could not
answer Mewanee because he was only a baby and could not talk.

Mewanee soon reached the tree where baby brother’s cradle hung.

How nimbly he climbed the tall tree so that he might be very near his
brother!

[Illustration]

Mewanee peeped into the cradle and spoke to the little boy. Baby brother
smiled at Mewanee. His tiny face wrinkled all up and Mewanee could
hardly see his little black eyes.

Baby brother looked very much like Mewanee, but of course he was only a
baby, and Mewanee was a big boy nearly twelve years old.

What fun the two brothers had as they watched the little grey squirrels
frisk in and out among the branches of the very tree from which baby
brother’s cradle hung!

Mewanee gathered some nuts, and the little squirrels hopped about him
saying, “Chip, chip, chip! Please give us the nuts!”

How eagerly they took the nuts from Mewanee’s hand!

Then they sat up on their hind legs and nibbled the nuts with great
glee.

Baby brother laughed very merrily as he watched the dear little frisky
creatures.

The birds, too, sang happily from their nests in the tree-tops. They
seemed to be singing to Mewanee and baby brother.

Mewanee answered the song.

Indian people could talk to all the animals of the forest.

These two Indian boys were having a happy time together when their
mother came from the field.

She swung her tiny papoose on her back, and away they went, Mewanee,
mother and baby brother.

Mewanee’s mother was very strong. Indian women must be strong because
they have to do all of the hard work in the fields.

Mewanee’s mother looked like all of the other Indian women. She had long
black hair and copper-colored skin.

[Illustration: A MOCCASIN]

She had a light weight skin wound about her waist, for it was summer
time and she did not need the heavier fur skin which she wore in winter.

There were moccasins on her feet, and long chains of beads and shells
about her neck.

On and on they went, in and out among the trees, through the forest.

Mewanee wished to go more quickly, so he ran on ahead of his mother and
baby brother. He was very happy and gay as he ran onward.

Finally he reached the opening in the forest where were the many wigwams
which made the Indian village.

Mother and baby brother soon reached the village.

Father Sun was bidding them welcome as he shone so brightly from above.

Mother was very tired from her hard work in the field and her long walk,
so with her tiny papoose on her back she entered the wigwam.

Mewanee stayed outside to watch some of the Indian women at work near
by.

He asked if he might help them, but they laughed as they said, “You are
too young, Mewanee; you could not lift these heavy poles.”

[Illustration]




                                   II
                                THE HOME


Mewanee was interested in watching these two Indian women build a
wigwam. They had already set the poles in a circle in the earth and tied
them together at the top with strong deer sinews.

When Mewanee came up they were wrapping the skins about the poles.

There were twelve buffalo skins which had been dried in the sun and
sewed together very firmly.

How quickly they stretched the skins about the poles and fastened them
to the earth with strong pegs!

One woman drove the pegs into the earth with her stone axe while the
other woman held the skin.

Mewanee watched them lace up the front of the wigwam.

Of course they left an opening for the doorway.

They must have an opening at the top also.

Mewanee knew that they must put a flap over the opening in the top, for
the hole must be covered in case of rain and wind.

Smoke was coming from the opening in the chief’s wigwam.

[Illustration: MEWANEE’S WIGWAM]

Mewanee’s mother had built a fire in the hole, which was in the center
of the earth floor of their wigwam.

Mewanee saw the smoke and knew that his mother was cooking supper.

He rushed toward his own wigwam and quickly entered the doorway.

The chief’s wigwam had queer looking pictures painted all over the
outside. Every picture meant something to these Indian people.

They used the juice of wild berries and roots for paint.

When Mewanee entered the wigwam it was filled with smoke.

[Illustration: A STONE JAR]

Mewanee’s mother was cooking some deer meat in a large stone jar, which
she had placed on the fire.

Mewanee watched his mother stir the meat with a carved bone spoon.

[Illustration: MEWANEE WATCHED HIS MOTHER]

Then he wandered about the room looking at the axes, knives, spears,
warclubs, and bows and arrows which hung about the walls.

He picked up a tomahawk and showed it to baby brother who was hanging in
his cradle from a peg in one of the poles of the wigwam.

Baby brother smiled as Mewanee brandished the tomahawk about, just as he
had seen his father do.

[Illustration: A BASKET]

Mewanee loved to handle these weapons and he longed for the day to come
when he would be big and strong enough to use them. He had his own bow
and arrows now, but they were not so large as his father’s.

Mewanee peeped into the stone jars and rush baskets standing about.

Some of the jars were filled with corn, others with powdered deer and
buffalo meat. Mewanee was happy to see so much food.

Mewanee soon threw himself on one of the mats and stretched himself
before the fire.

He listened for his father’s footsteps which he could hear when a long
distance off.

Now Mewanee quickly jumped up and ran out of the wigwam.

He stood quite still and listened.

The beautiful blue river which ran along in front of the wigwam seemed
to call Mewanee to its banks.

Mewanee loved that great, blue, peaceful river and listened to its
silvery tones.

Often he would say, “O river, river, when shall I be big and strong and
brave like my father?”

And the river would answer, “Have patience, Mewanee. The day will come
when you will be chief of this whole tribe.”

Then Mewanee would raise up his arms and ask the Great Spirit for help,
that he might be strong and brave enough some day to take his father’s
place as chief of his tribe.




                                  III
                                THE HUNT


While Mewanee listened and waited, his father, the chief, approached.

The chief was big and brave and strong.

His copper-colored body had many strange pictures painted upon it.

His black hair hung about his neck and shoulders and was decorated with
many feathers.

A short skin skirt hung about his waist. His deer-skin moccasins made
his step very light and soft.

Mewanee also wore moccasins. His mother made them from buckskin and
sewed them together with a queer bone needle threaded with deer sinews.

[Illustration: A WAR CLUB]

In the winter the Indian people wore snowshoes and heavy fur skins over
their bodies.

Mewanee jumped up and down for joy when he saw his father. He was very
proud of being a chief’s son.

The chief carried his war club in his belt, and his bow and arrow in his
hand.

He had many scalp locks dangling from his belt.

These scalp locks showed that Mewanee’s father was a brave chief.
Indians took scalp locks from the heads of the people they killed,
because they thought that these showed their bravery.

Mewanee was very glad to see his father, who, he knew, had just come
home from the hunt.

He gave a loud shout when he saw the buffalo which some of the Indians
were bringing to the chief’s wigwam.

He looked at his father with great pride for he felt sure that the chief
had killed this splendid animal.

“How fine!” said Mewanee, as he and his father entered the wigwam.

Supper was ready and was quickly placed before the chief as he threw
himself upon a mat in one corner of the wigwam.

How fast the stewed meat, corn cakes and sassafras tea disappeared! The
chief used a gourd for a cup, and hollow pieces of tree trunk for
dishes.

It did not take him long to eat his supper because he ate very quickly.

Now the chief took out his long-stemmed pipe from his belt.

The tobacco he took from a skin bag which he also carried in his belt.

How quickly he filled the stone bowl of his pipe with the powdered
tobacco!

Then he rubbed together two pieces of flint. Oh! he lost the first
spark, but the second he caught with the thin piece of reed which he had
ready.

How contented he looked as he stretched himself lengthwise on the rug
and smoked his long pipe!

[Illustration: THE CHIEF’S PIPE]

The chief’s pipe was very beautiful.

The stem was wonderfully carved and was beautifully ornamented with
braids of porcupine quills and with beaks and tufts from woodpeckers’
heads.

Mewanee jumped up and looked eagerly at the fine buffalo which his
father had shot.

[Illustration: A SKIN SCRAPER]

He knew that the skin would make a fine warm covering for him next
winter. Mewanee’s mother would skin the buffalo with a sharp knife and
stretch the skin in the sun to dry.

Now that the chief had finished his supper, Mewanee, mother and baby
brother would eat.

Mewanee’s mother called to him and he hurried to the place his father
had just left.

[Illustration: BABY BROTHER’S CRADLE]

Mewanee was hungry and quickly ate the food which his mother put before
him. Baby brother awakened and wanted supper too. Mother took the cradle
from the peg and fed her little boy some of the corn cake which had been
left.

Suddenly the chief got up from his skin mat and rushed out of the
wigwam.

Mewanee rushed out also. He wondered why his father stood so silent and
looked anxiously toward a hill in the distance.

He stood by his father’s side and said nothing.

Now the chief put his ear to the ground and listened.

Indians could hear sounds miles away and they had very keen sight.

The evening was very still and peaceful. The gentle moon was just about
to peep from behind the clouds.

The chief jumped up very quickly. He was silent and serious.

Yet he looked and looked into the distance.

Mewanee too was very thoughtful; he was anxious to know why his father
seemed so worried.

[Illustration: “MY SON,” SAID THE CHIEF, “I FEAR OUR ENEMY.”]

At last he said, “What is the trouble, father? Why are you so silent and
grave?”

“My son,” said the chief, “I fear our enemy, the Indians who live beyond
that distant hill.

“May the Great Spirit protect and guard us from their wrath.”

Then he sent Mewanee into the wigwam, while the stars said, “Good night,
Mewanee, good night.”

[Illustration]




                                   IV
                               THE ENEMY


The chief gave a loud call.

This call was heard by all of the Indian people in the village, but only
the men responded to it because the women did not take part in warfare.

They came from all directions, running toward their chief.

How quickly they gathered the cedar logs and branches and lighted the
fire! Then they sat around the fire and listened to the chief who spoke
to them.

[Illustration: A FIRE DRILL]

They were very silent and grave because they knew that trouble was upon
them.

Suddenly they stretched their bodies face downward on the ground and
asked for help and strength from the Great Spirit.

Their chief had told them that he feared that the enemy might be upon
them at any moment. He had heard strange sounds in the distance which
told him that the enemy were astir. He thought it wise to send men to
the distant hill, which had an outlook over the surrounding country.

These watchers were to signal him by means of a fire on the top of the
hill. If the signal should be a bright light it would tell them that the
enemy was approaching, but if they saw smoke they would know that they
were safe from the attack for the night.

The Indians knew that if they were attacked that night, and if they were
not prepared for the attack, their whole village would be destroyed.

Others of the Indians stationed themselves here and there to keep watch.

[Illustration: AN ANTLER WAR CLUB]

Some of them in their birch-bark canoes watched from the river. How
gracefully they glided to and fro on the peaceful river!

The chief approached the camp fire and threw a cedar mat upon it.

He did this so that he might more easily see the signal fire from yonder
hill.

All was very quiet while the Indians waited patiently through the long
night.

The kindly moon and the tiny stars looked down upon them seeming to say,
“Be of good cheer. The Great Spirit will protect you.”

[Illustration: A WAR CLUB]

Through the long night they watched and waited. Silently they smoked
their long pipes while they looked anxiously toward the distant hill.

The river looked beautiful in the still night. What a terrible thing it
would be if the enemy should attack this peaceful village!

Suddenly in the early morning the chief gave a loud shout, as he raised
his arms to the Great Spirit. The signal from yonder hill had told him
that all danger from the enemy was passed.

The enemy was not approaching their village, but had gone in the
opposite direction.

Wearily the Indians wandered toward their wigwams.

The men from the river had been watching also. When they saw the smoke
they paddled toward the shore. How lightly and easily they pulled their
canoes up on the river bank!

These bark canoes were very light and strong. The Indians made their
canoes by stretching the bark from the birch tree over a frame of pine
wood. Then they fastened the bark to the frames with the roots of the
spruce tree.

[Illustration: HOW EASILY THEY PULLED THEIR CANOES UP ON THE BANK!]

Mewanee had a canoe of his own and loved to paddle along this beautiful,
bright, blue river.

One by one the Indian men entered their wigwams.

The chief was the last to leave. He still had fear of the enemy. Yet he
knew that for that night there was no danger. He wondered where the
enemy had gone, and if they had attacked another village.

At last all was quiet and this Indian village was at rest.

[Illustration: A WAR CLUB]




                                   V
                           THE FRIENDLY TRIBE


In the silence of the early morning came the distant sound of hoof
beats.

Louder and louder, nearer and nearer grew the sound.

Many Indians rushed from their wigwams, put their ears to the ground and
listened.

Nearer and nearer it came, while the Indians listened and waited.

Suddenly from the nearby forest dashed a beautiful black pony.

On the pony’s back sat an Indian youth about fifteen years old.

He sat tall and straight. His eyes were bright and shining.

He had only a small skin wound about his body, though the night was cool
and chilly.

Quickly he rode and at last reached the wigwam of the chief.

Then he leaped lightly to the ground and began talking in great
excitement.

He had been riding hard for many hours and was tired and worn.

But he carried an important message, and must lose no time in giving it.
He said, “Chief, the enemy is upon my people. My father, the chief of
his tribe, sent me to ask for your aid.

“Our tribe is not strong enough to ward off the attack of the enemy.

“I fear that the enemy has already burned our village and destroyed our
crops.”

The Indians at a signal from their chief collected about him.

They decided to go at once to the aid of this friendly tribe.

It did not take them long to get their war clubs and tomahawks. They
were always ready for battle.

Some rushed off in canoes. Others, headed by their chief and the youth,
jumped upon their horses and went galloping away as fast as the wind.

Still others remained at home to protect their village, fearing that the
enemy might come that way.

[Illustration: THEY GALLOPED AWAY AS FAST AS THE WIND]

On and on the Indians rushed through the forest, along the river edge.

The canoes skimmed along the surface of the water like birds in the air.

But alas! they were too late.

When the Indians reached the village of the friendly tribe they saw a
mass of flames. The enemy had gone after setting fire to all the
wigwams.

The Indian women were running about, their long black hair flowing in
the wind.

They were wringing their hands and calling on the Great Spirit for
mercy.

They carried their babies strapped to their backs while the older
children clung to their mothers, badly frightened.

The men simply stood and looked at their burning village.

[Illustration: A WAMPUM BELT]

They were grateful to the other Indian tribe even though it could do
nothing to help them.

These two tribes had sealed their friendship by means of a belt of
wampum.

Wampum, which was the only kind of money these Indian people knew, was
made from various colored shells shaped into beads and strung on deer
sinews. Some Indian tribes wore the strings of wampum wound about their
necks, while others wove them into strong belts of many colors.

When two tribes wished to seal their friendship they did so by giving a
wampum belt.

Mewanee’s father felt very sorry for these Indian people. Indeed they
were a very unhappy tribe of Indians. All of their wigwams were burned,
and all of their food gone.

As they collected about their chief, he told them that Mewanee’s father
had invited them to share his village until they could rebuild their
own.

So they set out toward the neighboring village. Most of them had to walk
because all of the horses and canoes had been destroyed by the fire.

Father Sun sent upon them his friendly light as they trudged along.

The birds chirped from the tree-tops. They seemed to understand that
these people were very sad.

At last, tired and footsore, they reached the village in which Mewanee
lived.

They were glad for a place to rest.

They threw themselves face downward upon the ground and gave thanks to
the Great Spirit for sending this friendly tribe to their aid.




                                   VI
                              THE COUNCIL


There was very little time for rest, for they must be ready to go into
the forest to kill the deer and bear.

They would need many skins and much food because they were such a large
party.

The women must go into the forest to cut poles for their wigwams.

Before starting on the hunt the chief called a council.

The council was opened by a prayer to the Great Spirit thanking him for
the safety of this friendly Indian tribe and asking that, with the help
of the Great Spirit, they might have a fine hunt. The Indian men smoked
their pipes in silence.

When the chief had finished speaking, the men arose and clasping hands,
they danced in a circle, chanting a song as they danced.

It was a song of sadness, to which their feet kept perfect time.

While the Indian men were in council the squaws were getting the food
ready for the hunt.

Many corn cakes must be made so that the men need not start out hungry.

How quickly they made the corn flour into a thick paste and pressed it
into cakes! Then they threw the cakes into boiling water.

[Illustration: A MORTAR FOR POUNDING CORN]

Mewanee was watching some of the women get the corn ready for flour.
They threw the ears of corn into the jar of boiling water. Then they
took out the ears of corn and easily pulled off the skin. Mewanee was
interested when they cut the kernels from the ear and put them in the
sun to dry.

[Illustration: A MORTAR]

In a few days these kernels would be ready to be pounded into flour.

Mewanee had seen his mother make corn flour. He loved to watch her put
the dry kernels in a hollow stone and pound them with another stone
until they were ground into a fine powder.

The men were ready for the hunt. They had their stone axes, bows and
skin quivers filled with arrows.

[Illustration: A STONE AXE]

Some of the Indians carried skin bags filled with roasted corn and
powdered buffalo meat, for they might be gone for several days.

Others carried bags filled with water, for they might not reach a spring
where they could get fresh water.

Mewanee watched the Indians set forth. He wished to join them in the
hunt, but he was too young.

Then he quietly stole toward the river. He carried his bow and quiver
bag with him.

His mother saw him go, but did not call him back. She wished her boy to
become brave and strong.

Mewanee loved to do the things his father did. He could take straight
aim, for he had used a bow and arrow ever since he was a little fellow.

When he was a little boy he used a tiny bow and short arrows, but as he
grew taller and stronger his father made him longer arrows.

Mewanee’s bow and arrows were made just like the chief’s.

The bow was made of hickory wood, with twisted buffalo sinews stretched
from end to end.

[Illustration: MEWANEE’S BOW]

The bow string was stretched so tightly that it caused the wood to bend
in a slight curve.

The arrows which Mewanee carried in his skin quiver bag were about two
feet long with a pointed piece of flint fastened securely at one end.

Mewanee reached the river and quickly pulled his canoe to the edge. It
was very light and Mewanee pulled it along quite easily.

How lightly he jumped into it and how swiftly he paddled down the river!

He knew where the beavers built their lodges not far down the stream.

[Illustration: A SNOWSHOE]

He should love to trap a beaver, but he knew that he must wait until
winter for that. He felt sure that his father would let him go beaver
hunting with him when the snow came.

Then he would wear his snowshoes and glide swiftly over the surface of
the snow.

For several hours Mewanee paddled on the beautiful, peaceful river. He
didn’t stop for rest, and he had no food with him.

Indian boys were taught that they must endure hunger and fatigue, so
Mewanee was not unhappy.

How quiet he was and how eagerly he looked first this way, then that!

Suddenly he crouched down in the bottom of the canoe. His eyes were just
on a level with the top edge of the side. His arms were extended to
shoot.

He was very quiet, for the flock of wild geese which he saw in the
distance would scatter if he made the least noise.

[Illustration: MEWANEE TOOK CAREFUL AIM]

How gracefully they glided over the surface of the water! Soon they
would be very near Mewanee.

He awaited their coming. He did not stir for he did not wish to disturb
them.

Now up he sprang, rested on one knee, and took careful aim.

First one arrow, then another and another skimmed through the air.

Each arrow had been carefully aimed, and Mewanee had three fine geese to
take home.

He felt that he had been able to help in providing food for the friendly
Indian tribe.

On his way home Mewanee stopped to call to the squirrels as they ran to
and fro on the river’s edge.

He talked to them as he threw them acorns which he found in his quiver
bag. He stopped to listen to the birds as they sang to him from their
nests in the trees.

Homeward he paddled. It was getting late, but Mewanee was not afraid.

It was twilight when Mewanee pulled his canoe up on the river bank and
walked toward his wigwam.

He was very happy indeed, that he had the three fine geese which he
carried over his shoulder.

Mewanee’s mother was waiting for him, and baby brother smiled a welcome.

Little brother was still in his linden cradle.

I am sure an American child would feel quite unhappy if he were bound in
a cradle so much of the time, but Indian babies became quite accustomed
to it. They must learn to endure pain and suffering. That was their
first lesson.

As soon as baby brother was old enough he would be allowed to run about
and care for himself.

Mewanee did not say that he was hungry but he was glad to eat the cakes
and maple syrup which his mother gave him.

She was pleased when she saw the wild geese which Mewanee had shot.

While Mewanee was eating his supper the men came home from the hunt.
They had decided to return to the village for the night and set out
again early the next morning.

Mewanee rushed out of the wigwam to see what they had brought as a
result of the hunt.

He wished also to show the geese which he had shot. He was most anxious
that his father, the chief, should see them.

Mewanee smiled when his father said, “My brave son!”

After supper the Indians sat about smoking.

They were silent and thoughtful.




                                  VII
                             IN THE FOREST


This Indian village was a very crowded one that night.

The squaws and children slept in the wigwams, while the Indian men
stretched themselves on the ground outside.

A few kept watch, for fear the enemy might return and destroy their
village.

The tiny stars twinkled brightly from the heavens.

The good moon sent her protecting light upon the village.

All was very peaceful, except for the hoots of the owls which sounded
through the forest.

The enemy did not return that night.

Early in the morning the Indians awoke after a good rest. They felt that
they must go out again in search of more food.

Some carried long spears with them, so that they might spear the fish.
Others went into the forest carrying their bows and quiver bags with
them.

The women, with their babies on their backs, started out to gather poles
for new wigwams. They must lose no time for winter was at hand, and
wigwams must be built before snow came.

[Illustration: WHAT SPORT THEY HAD, DIVING AND SWIMMING!]

While the women were busy and the men hunting and fishing, the children
gathered for games. Some of the boys ran to the river. What sport they
had diving and swimming!

Others jumped on their ponies and had a fine time racing.

How they did dash along, so fearless and brave!

Now one was ahead, now another!

How they laughed and shouted as they rode!

The ponies seemed to enjoy the race as much as the boys.

Some of the older boys were enjoying a game of javelins which they were
playing.

They had lined up on either side of the field.

One side had bone rings, and the other side long javelins.

Now one player threw a ring, and the opposite player tried to catch it
on his javelin.

Oh! the first player caught the other’s ring.

Now the next two players tried and one caught the other’s ring.

The third player didn’t take good aim and lost his partner’s ring. He
must give his javelin to the opposite side.

After all on one side have had a chance to catch the rings, the opposite
side will have a chance.

When both sides have tried, the side having more javelins will win the
game.

The boys had great fun as they played. They laughed and shouted and
danced for joy.

Mewanee grew tired of watching and wandered off into the forest. No one
noticed his going.

He had his bow and arrow with him.

He started off in the direction the hunters had taken earlier in the
day.

On and on he ran through the forest. He stopped to talk with the
chipmunks or to feed the squirrels as they leaped about the ground.

The birds flitted about him in great glee. They twittered and chirped
and flew about his shoulders.

Mewanee was very happy. He had no thought of fear. He loved the birds
and the wild animals of the forest and enjoyed being with them.

On and on he walked, into the dense forest.

As evening drew near he grew tired. He lay down under a tall pine tree
and was soon fast asleep.

He had been sleeping very soundly, when suddenly he was awakened by a
fierce howl.

He jumped up and looked about him!

Already he could see the flaming eyes of a wolf not far off.

Quickly he sprang to the pine tree and with one bound, started to climb
it.

Before even the swiftest wolf could reach him he was way up on the
topmost bough.

Poor Mewanee was badly frightened now. As he looked below he saw the
eyes of the hungry wolf glaring at him through the darkness.

How bright and terrible his eyes looked! Mewanee had never before been
so near a wolf.

The silvery moon looked down upon the little fellow, seeming to say, “Do
not fear. I will care for you.”

The soft wind whispered to Mewanee and told him to have no fear. Still
Mewanee was not comforted.

“O Great Spirit,” cried Mewanee, “protect me from this terrible wolf.”

[Illustration: MEWANEE’S QUIVER BAG]

Mewanee felt for his quiver bag. He had forgotten that he had laid his
bow and arrows under the tree.

He had no way of helping himself. He thought of his father and mother
and his dear little baby brother.

He knew that while he remained in the tree, the wolf could not reach
him.

He wondered if his father and the other Indians would return this way.

He did not know what to do. He did not dare to sleep for the wolf still
kept watch. Now and then the wolf gave a hungry howl and looked fiercely
at the little Indian boy sitting in the tree-top.

Hour after hour passed.

It was morning, and Father Sun was smiling at him with his kindly light.
Mewanee loved the great bright sun and talked to him as if he were his
father.

The Indian people believed that the wind, sun, moon, stars and thunder
were good spirits which helped them care for themselves and their lands.

Mewanee felt sure that if he were patient, help would come, but he was
so very tired that he did not know how much longer he could stay
crouched in the tree-top.

A wild blackbird sang to him from a branch near by. He said, “Fear not,
Mewanee; help is near at hand.”

Mewanee tried to be brave.

Suddenly all grew very dark within the forest.

Thunder rumbled in the distance.

Flash upon flash of lightning shot through the sky.

Mewanee crouched lower and lower.

He felt sure that the Great Spirit had answered his prayer by sending
the Thunder God to him.

As peal after peal resounded through the forest and flash upon flash
burst upon him, the wolf gave a deep, angry howl. Then he turned and
fled into the dense forest.

Mewanee heard him go and raised his arms in prayer.

Soon the sky became clear and the sun shone once more.

Mewanee slowly and cautiously climbed down the tree. He was stiff and
cold and hungry.

He threw himself face downward upon the ground and gave thanks to the
Great Spirit for his care.

He picked up his bow and quiver bag and ran, as fast as he could, toward
the opening. On and on he ran until he came to the edge of the forest,
when he could see his village.

His father and the other Indians had returned from the hunt. He saw them
going to and fro seeming troubled and anxious. The chief, his father,
sat watching and waiting.

Mewanee ran as fast as his tired legs would let him.

“Father, father!” he shouted.

The chief jumped up and clasped his son in his arms.

All of the Indians rushed toward them asking many questions.

When they heard the story they sang words of praise.

The chief led his son to the wigwam and bade the mother give him food
and drink.

“Rest well, my son,” he said, “for you have indeed been a brave boy. I
feel sure that you will be a fit warrior to take my place.

“We have had a fine hunt; you have returned unharmed; we can be at peace
once more.”




                                  VIII
                             THE SACRIFICE


It was evening, a beautiful starlight evening.

The tiny stars watched over these Indian people as they slept.

They were tired with the long chase, though they were happy with the
thought of the fine deer and buffalo which they had killed.

The Indians slept soundly all of the night. When they awoke the sun was
saying a bright “Good morning.”

[Illustration: SOME OF THE WOMEN STRETCHED SKINS WHILE OTHERS MADE
BASKETS]

They arose, stretched themselves and ran to the river for a swim.

The women were already busy getting the skins from the animals.

Some of the women stretched the skins in the sun to dry, while others
made baskets.

The Indian people dried meat in the sun and then powdered it. They
stored the powdered meat in baskets and jars for the winter.

The men spent nearly every day in hunting and fishing.

[Illustration: A MEAT POUNDER]

Mewanee came from his wigwam looking very unhappy and sad.

Baby brother was very ill.

His mother tried to soothe her baby boy with a low, sweet lullaby, and
Mewanee tried to quiet him by a soft chant. But baby brother would not
be quieted.

Mother gave him a drink made from wild roots, but this did not seem to
help the little fellow.

As the day passed, his fever grew stronger and fiercer.

When the chief came home and saw how sick baby brother was he said, “The
medicine man must be sent for. He will cure my son.”

The medicine man was thought to be very wise. The Indian people believed
that he could cure all sickness.

They thought that the power to cure was given to the medicine man by the
Great Spirit.

So the medicine man was sent for.

While they were waiting, the Indians built a fire and gathered about it.

They sang a mournful song to the Great Spirit. As they sang they made
strange gestures with their arms.

They thought that the chief’s son was ill because they had in some way
offended the Great Spirit.

They hoped in this way to appease the wrath of the Great Spirit.

Suddenly a queer looking old man rushed into the circle. He made all
sorts of strange noises and jumped up and down as he shouted.

This was the medicine man for whom the chief had sent.

He motioned the chief to bring his little son to him.

[Illustration: A CARVED BONE]

Then he ordered a jar filled with water to be placed on the fire. Now
the medicine man threw some herbs into the jar of water.

He danced and sang as he stirred the mixture with a carved bone which he
carried in a skin bag.

This bone was supposed to have a certain charm.

The chief came from the wigwam, carrying baby brother in his linden
cradle. As he came near, the medicine man raised his arms above the
baby, muttering low noises. Baby brother stopped crying and lay very
quiet.

[Illustration: THE MEDICINE MAN]

[Illustration: A WOODEN SPOON]

All the other Indians stretched themselves face downward on the ground,
praying to the Great Spirit that the chief’s baby might soon be well.

The medicine man gave baby brother a drink of the warm herbs. He used a
queerly shaped wooden spoon which was carved with figures of wild
animals.

Then bending low over the baby he whispered a soft song. His low tones
soon quieted the little boy. The baby’s eyelids drooped. In a moment he
had fallen fast asleep.

Mother came out and carried her little boy into the wigwam.

Then the medicine man spoke to the chief. He said that his son would not
be well until a sacrifice of a red deer should be made.

This sacrifice would ward off the anger of the Great Spirit.

Fortunately the Indian people had killed a red deer in their last hunt.
So the deer was brought toward the medicine man.

First the medicine man said a prayer over the body of the deer.

All joined in with low chants.

Finally the deer was carefully placed upon the fire amid the low
murmuring of all present.

Then the medicine man walked slowly away.

Mewanee had been waiting in the wigwam. He was very, very sad.

When his father told him that the medicine man had promised that baby
brother would soon be well, he smiled and looked glad again.

Before another sunrise the little fellow was much better, and his mother
sang a song of praise to the Great Spirit.




                                   IX
                                THE FAST


There was a new moon now and Mewanee was twelve years old. He would soon
go hunting and fishing with his father.

Some day he would be chief of his tribe, but not before he had proved
his power of endurance. He must prove this power by a long fast.

On this night when the new moon was looking down upon them, the Indians
had collected about the fire.

Mewanee was lying face downward upon the ground very near the fire.

The chief, his father, was standing above him with arms outstretched as
he said these words:

“My son, the time is at hand when you must go into the forest for your
long fast. You must prove to your people that you are brave and strong
and ready to try the test of fasting.

“My son must show that he is strong and courageous. You need have no
fear, for the Great Spirit will protect you.”

Then the Indians danced around Mewanee singing in a solemn chant.

[Illustration: THE CHIEF WAS STANDING WITH ARMS OUTSTRETCHED]

This was their way of saying, “Be brave. O chief’s son, be brave!”

Then the chief led his son into the dense forest and left him lying upon
the ground.

Mewanee had no fear, for was he not the chief’s son?

Each day his father went to him with words of cheer.

Though Mewanee’s heart was filled with courage, each morning found him
paler and weaker. Yet not once did he complain nor did he ask for food
or drink.

The great chief’s heart was filled with pity when on the tenth morning
he saw his son stretched pale and still at his feet.

[Illustration: “FAIL NOT, MY SON,” SAID THE CHIEF]

“Fail not, my son,” said the chief. “Only two days more, and you will go
home in the honor and glory of the brave.

“The Great Spirit will continue to protect you, and you will go home to
your people, the victor of a great battle.”

On the twelfth day the chief went into the forest having food and drink
for Mewanee.

Not a word was said. The chief looked at his son with the light of
gladness in his eyes. The fast was ended and his son was the victor.

With food and drink, strength returned and Mewanee was able to walk with
his father to his people.

As he walked through the forest the birds seemed to sing a song of
praise. The trees seemed to nod to him and to wish him well.

His people were awaiting his return and had prepared a feast of welcome
for him.

As Mewanee entered the village, by the side of his father, all were
singing and dancing. Some of the men rushed toward Mewanee and led him
into the center of the merrymaking.

Then there was singing, dancing, and feasting. These Indian people were
glad to honor the youth who would some day be their chief.

[Illustration]




                                   X
                              THE NEW HOME


It was fall before the homes of the friendly tribe were done. All had
been busy getting ready for the winter. Now the wigwams were finished.

Mewanee’s father had divided his dried meat and corn with this friendly
tribe. He had also given them powdered tobacco. The Indian men would be
unhappy without tobacco for their long pipes.

The friendly tribe was very thankful to Mewanee’s father for his
kindness to them.

They were collected around the camp fire that night. The children and
women were in the wigwams. Only the men could take part in council.

All was hushed and silent, when suddenly the chief of the friendly tribe
arose and all of the other Indians of this tribe followed their chief.

They danced in and out, and up and down, making queer sounds. This was
their way of saying, “Thank you, O Indian Chief.”

Then they prayed words of thankfulness.

Getting up slowly, they took their places in the circle and pulled their
long pipes from their belts.

They lighted their pipes by catching sparks from the pipes of the other
Indian men, who had been smoking during the dance.

They were very silent, and sat smoking their pipes until the fire died
out.

Then slowly they arose and wandered toward their wigwams. The night was
very cold now so all must take shelter within the wigwams.

Early next morning the village was astir for it was the day of parting.

[Illustration: A CARRYING BASKET]

Children were running hither and thither. The Indian women were busy
collecting the things which they were to take with them.

Baby brother was toddling along, his hand in Mewanee’s. He was able to
walk now, and so need not be carried about in his cradle. He smiled at
Mewanee and looked very wise, as if he knew what it was all about.

Just as they were about to start, Mewanee’s father came out leading a
beautiful gray horse.

He approached the chief of the friendly tribe and motioned him to mount
the horse.

This the chief did.

Then with the chief riding at the head, the friendly tribe started
toward their home.

Father Sun sent his kindly light upon these people as they wandered
homeward.

Mewanee watched until he could see the friendly tribe no longer. He knew
they would be glad to be home again.

[Illustration: HE STRETCHED HIMSELF UPON THE RIVER’S BANK]

Then he wandered slowly toward the beautiful river, happy in the thought
that he was the chief’s son.

He stretched himself upon the river’s bank thinking of the time when he
should become chief of his tribe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mewanee, by Belle Wiley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEWANEE ***

***** This file should be named 62935-0.txt or 62935-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/9/3/62935/

Produced by Richard Tonsing, Tim Lindell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
